Additions/changes to FAQ (#73)
ga4gh/data-security: AAI/FAQ.md

JSON format.

{% plantuml %}

hide footbox
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam ParticipantPadding 20

box "Researcher"  #eee
actor       "User Agent"                as user
participant Client                      as client
end box

box "AAI"
participant Broker                      as broker
collections "IdP"                       as idps
end box

box "Data Owner"
collections "Visa Issuer(s)"            as issuers
end box

box "Data Holder"
participant "Clearing House"            as clearing
participant "Data"                      as data
end box

==OIDC==

ref over user, client, broker, idps
OIDC flow results in the client holding a *Passport-Scoped Access Token*.
end ref

==Use==

client -> clearing : Client requests data
note right
{
  Authorization: Bearer <Passport-Scoped Access Token>
}
end note

clearing -> broker : Clearing house asks for passport content
note right
{
  Authorization: Bearer <Passport-Scoped Access Token>
}
end note

group#DeepSkyBlue #LightSkyBlue Informative Only (not defined in the specification)
broker -> issuers : Fetch signed visa(s) for user
broker <- issuers : Return signed visa(s) for user
note right
[
  "<visa1>",
  "<visa2>"
]
end note
end

> clearing <- broker : UserInfo Endpoint returns passport content (plain JSON, not signed JWT)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clearing <- broker : UserInfo Endpoint returns passport content
```

note right
{
  "iss": "https://<issuer-website>/",
  "sub": "<subject-identifier>",

>   "jti": "<token-identifier>",

Reviewer 2: **jti** (short for JWT ID) is not returned from UserInfo, because the response is not a JWT
```suggestion
```

  "ga4gh_passport_v1": [
    "<visa1>",
    "<visa2>",
   ...
  ]
}
end note

note over clearing, data  #FFCCCB
Decision is made to release data using information contained in the
passport - and this decision is coordinated with the data system to
facilitate that actual data release.
end note

client <- clearing : Client is given data

{% endplantuml %}

<hr style="width: 10em; margin: 2em auto;"/>   

### What is the complete end to end flow using token exchange?

(last updated June 2022)

The exchange flow does not ever distribute the initial *Passport-Scoped Access Token* beyond
the client application. A token exchange operation is executed by the client, in

> exchange for a *Passport Token* that may be used downstream to access resources. In this example flow, the

Reviewer 2: Passport Token is not a defined term, the 1.2-draft-main branch defines [Passport](https://ga4gh.github.io/data-security/1.2-draft-main/aai-openid-connect-profile#term-passport) as "A signed and verifiable JWT container for holding Visas."
```suggestion
exchange for a *Passport* that may be used downstream to access resources. In this example flow, the
```

> *Passport Token* is included as authorisation in the POST to a DRS server. The token

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Passport* is included as authorisation in the POST to a DRS server. The token
```

box "AAI"
participant Broker                      as broker
collections "IdP"                       as idps
end box

box "Data Owner"
collections "Visa Issuer(s)"            as issuers
end box

box "Data Holder"
participant "Clearing House"            as clearing
participant "Data"                      as data
end box

==OIDC==

ref over user, client, broker, idps
OIDC flow results in the client holding a *Passport-Scoped Access Token*.
end ref

==Exchange==

client -> broker : Token exchange
note right
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:token-exchange
requested_token_type=urn:ga4gh:params:oauth:token-type:passport
subject_token=<Passport-Scoped Access Token>
subject_token_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token
audience=https://<drs-resource-server-website>/
end note

group#DeepSkyBlue #LightSkyBlue Informative Only (not defined in the specification)
broker -> issuers : Fetch signed visa(s) for user
broker <- issuers : Return signed visa(s) for user
note right
[
  "<visa1>",
  "<visa2>"
]
end note
end

client <- broker : Token exchange return
note right
{
  "access_token": "<passport token (base64 encoded)>",

>   "issued_token_type": "<TBD>",

Reviewer 2: As far as I understand [Token Type Identifiers section in Token Exchange RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693#section-3), this should be the URI that was used for the `requested_token_type` parameter in the token exchange request.
```suggestion
  "issued_token_type": "urn:ga4gh:params:oauth:token-type:passport",
```

  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 60
}

▼ passport token content decoded from base64 (generally opaque to the client) ▼

{

>   "typ": TBD,

Reviewer 2: [Passport Header](https://ga4gh.github.io/data-security/1.2-draft-main/aai-openid-connect-profile#passport-header) section defines this.
```suggestion
  "typ": "vnd.ga4gh.passport+jwt",
```

  "alg": "RS256",
  "kid": "<key-identifier>"
} .
{
  "iss": "https://<issuer-website>/",
  "sub": "<subject-identifier>",
  "aud": [
    "https://<drs-resource-server-website>/"
  ],
  "iat": <seconds-since-epoch>,
  "exp": <seconds-since-epoch>,
  "jti": "<token-identifier>",
  "ga4gh_passport_v1": [
    "<visa1>",
    "<visa2>",
    ...
  ]

> } . <secret>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
} . <signature>
```

end note

==Use==

client -> clearing : Client requests data
note right
{
REPLACE WITH CORRECT DRS DETAILS
}
end note

note over clearing, data  #FFCCCB
Decision is made to release data using information contained in the
passport token - and this decision is coordinated with the data system to
facilitate that actual data release.
end note

client <- clearing : Client is given data

{% endplantuml %}

<hr style="width: 10em; margin: 2em auto;"/>   

### Can a JWT alone be used for authentication even if the spec mostly talks about OIDC Flow?

(last updated ??? 2020)

Yes. This specification allows for groups to organize themselves in many ways.

> A trusted group of Brokers and Claims Clearinghouses are permitted to

Reviewer 2: Claim Clearinghouse was renamed to Passport Clearinghouse.
```suggestion
A trusted group of Brokers and Passport Clearinghouses are permitted to
```

[
  "<visa1>",
  "<visa2>"
]
end note
end

clearing <- broker : UserInfo endpoint returns list of signed visa(s)
note right
{
  "iss": "https://<issuer-website>/",
  "sub": "<subject-identifier>",
  "ga4gh_passport_v1": [
    "<visa1>",
    "<visa2>",
   ...
  ]
}
end note

note over clearing, data  #FFCCCB
Decision is made to release data using information contained in the
passport - and this decision is coordinated with the data system to
facilitate that actual data release.
end note

client <- clearing : Client is given data

{% endplantuml %}

<hr style="border: 2px solid; margin: 2em auto;"/>    

## Threat Analysis

### What is the danger of using a fully scoped (or audience-less) token in a multi node workflow

Unless down-scoped by the initial OIDC flow - the *Passport Scoped Access Token* is
a token that can unlock all data that the user is entitled to. Furthermore, it is
unscoped in audience - with no indications of 
the Clearinghouse (or downstream services) it is intended for.

The result of this is that if passed to a bad actor (a Clearinghouse that has been
compromised for example) - the bad actor can use the token
for sideways movement amongst the other nodes.

> Insert diagram.

Author: I have made a stab at a custom diagram - let me know if suitable

permissions for. S1 might not hold the data, S2 might hold the data. The User may
be allowed to bring that JWT to Software Stack S2 and get data authorized by the
claim in the JWT and held by S2, provided that S2 can trust S1 as a valid and
trustworthy client.

This enables two or more software stacks to work together more fluidly than having
the same user authenticate twice across two stacks to access the same data. There
is an assumption that these two software stacks have agreements and risk assessment
in place in order to make this a secure method of authentication and that the User
is aware that they are exchanging information with another stack without
explicit OIDC-style consent.

![JWT-Only Flow between trusted stacks](./GA4GH_JWT-only_flow.png)

<hr style="border: 2px solid; margin: 2em auto;"/>    

## Threat Analysis

### What is the danger of using a fully scoped (or audience-less) token in a multi node workflow

Unless down-scoped by the initial OIDC flow - the *Passport Scoped Access Token* is

> a token that can unlock all data that the user in entitled too. Furthermore, it is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a token that can unlock all data that the user is entitled to. Furthermore, it is
```

It is impossible for the SPA to prove that is correct/desired piece of code
executing the exchange - and not some other system that has somehow captured a
*Passport-Scoped Access Token* from the browser and is making an exchange.

For these reasons, it is recommended at this point that SPAs are not used for
applications where the SPA is solely responsible for the dissemination of
genomic data.

It is possible for a SPA to predominantly execute in browser - but to still use
a (small) backend set of services to execute any OIDC flows and token exchanges. These
backend service *can* retain a secret and hence can prove client identity.

Insert diagram.

<hr style="border: 2px solid; margin: 2em auto;"/>    

## Legacy

### Can the output of `/userinfo` be used as a JWT for Authentication?

(consider removing as now dealt with more in spec)

The spec says that `/userinfo` may be formatted as a JWT. A Clearinghouse that
sends an access token to a `/userinfo` endpoint might get either JSON or a
formatted and signed JWT from a broker. The JWT can be used downstream as
an authentication mechanism if downstream services like Clearinghouses
support it and know what to do with it. 

> It is probable that a special token endpoint will exist in a future

Reviewer 2: the future is now :-)
